1. Select the type of triaxial test to be conducted from the dropdown menu. The tests vary in the testing conditions but for simulation purposes the only visible changes will be in the observations and graphs and no difference in the simulation shown.
2. Add a axial loading device from the apparatus menu. This will be used to apply the required loads/pressures on the sample.
3. Add a soil sample and a membrane from the apparatus menu. The sample will have porous stones on the top and bottom and the membrane will enclose the sample. We measure the dimensions of the sample as is visible from the values in the observations menu and use these to derive other required quantities like area, etc.
4. Add a cylindrical chamber/cell from the apparatus menu. This cell will surround the sample.
5. Add drainage pipes from the apparatus menu. These will be connected to the chamber and sample respectively to allow drainage based on the test type and testing conditions. 
6. Fill the cell with water by clicking on it. The water provides hydrostatic pressure as σ<sub>3</sub> as is visible from the value in the observations menu.
7. Click on the cell/chamber to start the machine and apply the required pressures. Observe the readings obtained in the table in the observations menu. Also observe the graph(s) derived from the table values.
8. Note that the main difference between the three tests is in the drainage conditions. In unconsolidated undrained test, no drainage is allowed at any step and hence the sample is said to be unconsolidated as well as undrained. In consolidated undrained test, drainage is allowed at the consolidation step but not at the shear step and hence the sample is said to be consolidated but undrained. In consolidated drained test, drainage is allowed at both the consolidation as well as the shear step and hence the sample is said to be consolidated and drained.
9. Change the value in the dropdown menu to repeat the experiment for different testing conditions.
